TEMP (#3)
Ericson2314/tech-proposals: proposals/accepted/051-ghc-base-libraries.rst

================
GHC's base libraries
================
----------
Combining stability with innovation
----------

:Date: June 2023
:Authors:
  John Ericson,
  Ben Gamari,
  Adam Gundry,
  Andrew Lelechenko,
  Julian Ospald,
  Simon Peyton Jones

.. sectnum::
.. contents::

> 

Reviewer: Introduction
=========
This document describes an plan agreed between the GHC Team and the Core Libraries Committee, saying how we plan to work in partnership to reconcile the goals of innovation and stability for GHC and its ecosystem.

Formally, then, it is not so much a proposal as a record of an outcome.  We are, nevertheless, using the Haskell Foundation Technical Working Group propsals repo, so that we can have a permanent  public record of how we plan to work, so that others can comment, and so that the document can be polished to add clarity where necessary.

Author: ```suggestion

Introduction
=========

This document describes an plan agreed between the GHC Team and the Core Libraries Committee, saying how we plan to work in partnership to reconcile the goals of innovation and stability for GHC and its ecosystem.

Formally, then, it is not so much a proposal as a record of an outcome.
We are, nevertheless, using the Haskell Foundation Technical Working Group proposals repo, so that we can have a permanent public record of how we plan to work, so that others can comment, and so that the document can be polished to add clarity where necessary.
```

Goals
=====

This proposal seeks to reconcile two goals, both of which are complex and multi-faceted.

1. **The Core Libraries Committee seeks to exercise its control over decisions affecting 'base' (API, performance, semantics), including its dependencies.**
   Managing API changes of ``base`` is the CLC's primary mandate.
   If ``base`` changes gratuitously, everyone suffers.

> 2. **The GHC team wants the freedom to:**

Reviewer: seeks the freedom

Author: ```suggestion
2. **The GHC team seeks the freedom to:**
```

   - Types, specifically including what instances are exposed

   - Semantics (including strictness)

   - Performance

   - Semantic changes to documentation (the charter says *"Documentation changes normally fall under GHC developers purview, except significant ones (e.g., adding or changing type class laws)."*)

   Beyond that, it has no interest in the implementation details (e.g. alpha renaming, moving things between modules, comments).

5. In curating the ``base`` API, it is immaterial where code lives.
   For example, if a change to ``ghc-prim`` changes the ``base`` API (as defined above) the GHC developers must consult the CLC.
   The fact that the change isn't physically part of the ``base`` package is immaterial.
   (Incidentally, ``base`` and ``ghc-prim`` are both part of the same GitHub repository, which also includes GHC's source code.)

Proposal
========

We propose to divide ``base`` into three packages:

- ``ghc-internals``: exposes aspects of GHC's internals that may be of interest to "hard-core" developers interested in maximum performance (see `Nikita's blog post <https://nikita-volkov.github.io/internal-convention-is-a-mistake/>`__).

>   The API of ``ghc-internals`` is of no direct interest to the CLC --- only its effects on the API of base.

Reviewer: The API of ghc-internals is fully under the control of the GHC team, and is of no direct....

Author: ```suggestion
  The API of ``ghc-internals`` is fully under the control of the GHC team, and of no direct interest to the CLC --- only its effects on the API of base.
```

- ``base``: as now, whose API is curated by CLC.
  Depends on ``ghc-internals``, and hence on ``ghc-bignum`` and ``ghc-prim``.

- ``ghc-experimental``, initially empty, depends on ``base`` and on ``ghc-internals``.
  Functions and data types here are intended to have their ultimate home in base, but while they are settling down they are subject to much weaker stability guarantees.
  Generally, new functions and types introduced in GHC Proposals would start their life here.
  Example: new type families and type constructors for tuples, `GHC Proposal #475 <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/475>`__.

>   Another example: future APIs to access RTS statistics, which are fairly stable and user-exposed, but which are (by design) coupled closely to GHC's runtime and hence may change.

Reviewer: new para

As its name suggests, the API of `ghc-experimental` is curated by the GHC team, although the CLC is willing to offer (non-binding) opinions, if consulted.

Author: ```suggestion
  Another example: future APIs to access RTS statistics, which are fairly stable and user-exposed, but which are (by design) coupled closely to GHC's runtime and hence may change.
  
  As its name suggests, the API of ``ghc-experimental`` is curated by the GHC team, although the CLC is willing to offer (non-binding) opinions, if consulted.
```

   This is quite open-ended; it is not clear what would be desirable, or how much it would cost.

Some modules in ``ghc-internals`` will very directly affect exports of ``base`` (e.g via shim).
These modules could be identified, via the existing ``CODEOWNERS`` mechanism, to ping CLC on any commit to those modules.
This list could be selective, or include all of ``ghc-internals``, at CLC's preference.

Some of these are cheap to do; others are less so.
Fortunately the HF seems willing to help.

*But whatever we do here will be a step forward* from our current, unsatisfactory situation.
Moreover, they will help with CI for changes to GHC itself! (It is rather *more* likely that a commit to GHC's simplifier will cause a perf regression in some package, than a commit to ``ghc-internals``.)

Discussion
==========

GHC Proposals process
---------------------

Some GHC proposals (a minority) directly affect the existing API of ``base``, and are not simply additions that can be exposed in ``ghc-experimental``.
It is unproductive for the GHC Steering Committee to have a long discussion, accept the proposals, and only *then* involve the CLC.

We propose that:

> - A GHC Proposal should advertise, in a separate section, that it makes changes to the ``base`` API, and what those changes are.

Reviewer: advertise, in a separate section
* What changes, if any, it makes to `ghc-experimental`
* What changes, if any, it makes to `base`

Author: ```suggestion
- A GHC Proposal should advertise, in a separate section:

  -  What changes, if any, it make to ``ghc-experimental``

  -  What changes, if any, it make to ``base``
```

- If there are any such changes, the author (and shepherd) should explicitly invite the CLC to participate in the discussion about the proposal.

>   The CLC will devote some effort to participating, and subsequently hold a non-binding vote.

Reviewer: The CLC will devote some effort to participating and, in the case of changes to `base`, will subsequently hold a non-binding vote.

Author: ```suggestion
  The CLC will devote some effort to participating and, in the case of changes to ``base``, will subsequently hold a non-binding vote.
```
